README.md, before:

# 0. MicroPython IOT application design

IOT (Internet of Things) systems commonly comprise a set of endpoints on a WiFi
network. Internet access is provided by an access point (AP) linked to a
router. Endpoints run an internet protocol such as MQTT or HTTP and normally
run continously. They may be located in places which are hard to access:
reliability is therefore paramount. Security is also a factor for endpoints
exposed to the internet.

Under MicroPython the available hardware for endpoints is limited. At the time
of writing (December 2018) the Pyboard D is not yet available. The ESP32 is
incapable of 24/7 operation owing to [this issue](https://github.com/micropython/micropython-esp32/issues/167).
The ESP8266 remains as a readily available inexpensive device which, with care,
is capable of long term reliable operation. It does suffer from limited
resources, in particular RAM. Achieving resilient operation in the face of WiFi
or server outages is not straightforward: see
[this document](https://github.com/peterhinch/micropython-samples/tree/master/resilient).
The approach advocated here radically simplifies writing resilient ESP8266 IOT
applications.

The usual arrangement for MicroPython internet access is as below.
![Image](images/block_diagram_orig.png)

Running internet protocols on ESP8266 nodes has the following drawbacks:
 1. It can be difficult to ensure resilience in the face of outages of WiFi and
 of the remote endpoint.
 2. Running TLS on the ESP8266 is demanding in terms of resources: establishing
 a connection can take 30s.
 3. There are potential security issues for internet-facing nodes.
 4. The security issue creates a requirement periodically to install patches to
 firmware or to libraries. This raises the issue of physical access.
 5. Internet applications can be demanding of RAM.

This document proposes an alternative where the ESP8266 nodes communicate with
a local server. This runs CPython code and supports the internet protocol
required by the application. The server and the ESP8266 nodes communicate using
a simple protocol based on the exchange of lines of text. The server can run on
a Linux box such as a Raspberry Pi; this can run 24/7 at minimal running cost.

![Image](images/block_diagram.png)  

Benefits are:
 1. Security is handled on a device with an OS. Updates are easily accomplished.
 2. The text-based protocol minimises the attack surface presented by nodes.
 3. The protocol is resilient in the face of outages of WiFi and of the server:
 barring errors in the application design, crash-free 24/7 operation is a
 realistic prospect.
 4. The amount of code running on the ESP8266 is smaller than that required to
 run a resilient internet protocol such as [this MQTT version](https://github.com/peterhinch/micropython-mqtt.git).
 5. The server side application runs under CPython on a relatively powerful
 device having access to the full suite of Python libraries. Such a platform
 is ideally suited to running an internet protocol. Even minimal hardware has
 the horsepower easily to support TLS, and to maintain concurrent links to
 multiple client nodes. Use of threading is feasible.

The principal drawback is that in addition to application code on the ESP8266
node, application code is also required on the PC to provide the "glue" linking
the internet protocol with each of the client nodes. In many applications this
code may be minimal.

There are use-cases where conectivity is entirely local, for example logging
locally acquired data or using some nodes to control and monitor others. In
such cases no internet protocol is required and the server side application
merely passes data between nodes and/or logs data to disk.

# 1. Contents

 0. [MicroPython IOT application design](./README.md#0-microPython-iot-application-design)  
 1. [Contents](./README.md#1-contents)  
 2. [Design](./README.md#2-design)  
  2.1 [Protocol](./README.md#21-protocol)  
 3. [Files](./README.md#3-files)  
  3.1 [Installation](./README.md#31-installation)  
 4. [Client side applications](./README.md#4-client-side-applications)  
  4.1 [The Client class](./README.md#41-the-client-class)  
 5. [Server side applications](./README.md#5-server-side-applications)  
  5.1 [The server module](./README.md#51-the-server-module)  
 6. [Ensuring resilience](./README.md#6-ensuring-resilience) Guidelines for application design.   
 7. [Quality of service](./README.md#7-quality-of-service) Guaranteeing message delivery.  
  7.1 [Using an acknowledge packet](./README.md#71-using-an-acknowledge-packet)  
  7.2 [Another approach](./README.md#72-another-approach)  
 8. [Performance](./README.md#8-performance)  
  8.1 [Latency and throughput](./README.md#81-latency-and-throughput)  
  8.2 [Client RAM utilisation](./README.md#82-client-ram-utilisation)  

# 2. Design

The code is asynchronous and based on `uasyncio` (`asyncio` on the server
side). Client applications on the ESP8266 import `client.py` which provides the
interface to the link. The server side application (written in Cpython) uses
`server_cp.py`.

Messages are required to be complete lines of text. They typically comprise an
arbitrary Python object encoded using JSON and terminated with a newline.

There is no guarantee of delivery of a message. Techniques to overcome this are
described in [section 7](./README.md#7-quality-of-service). Performance
limitations are discussed in [section 8](./README.md#8-performance).

## 2.1 Protocol

Client and server applications use `readline` and `write` methods to
communicate: in the case of an outage of WiFi or the connected endpoint, the
method will pause until the outage ends.

The link status is determined by periodic exchanges of keepalive messages. This
is transparent to the application. If a keepalive is not received within a user
specified timeout an outage is declared. On the client the WiFi is disconnected
and a reconnection procedure is initiated. On the server the connection is
closed and it awaits a new connection.

Each client has a unique ID which is stored in `local.py`. This ID enables the
server application to determine which physical client is associated with an
incoming connection.

###### [Contents](./README.md#1-contents)

# 3. Files

For ESP8266 client:

 1. `client.py` Client module.
 2. `c_app.py` Demo client-side application.
 3. `primitives.py` Stripped down version of `asyn.py`.

For server (run under CPython 3.5+):
 1. `server_cp.py` Server module.
 2. `s_app_cp.py` Demo server-side application.

For both:
 1. `local.py` Example of local config file.

`local.py` should be edited to ensure each client has a unique ID. Other
constants must be common to all clients and the server:
 1. `PORT` Port for socket communication.
 2. `SERVER` IP address of local server PC.
 3. `TIMEOUT` In ms. Normally 1500. See sections 6 and 7.
 4. `CLIENT_ID` Associates an ESP8266 with its server-side application. Must be
 unique to each client. May be zny `\n` terminated Python string.

## 3.1 Installation

The ESP8266 modules can run without recourse to frozen bytecode however the
device has insufficient RAM to compile `client.py`: it should therefor be 
[cross compiled](https://github.com/micropython/micropython/tree/master/mpy-cross).

The release firmware build (currently 1.9.4) incorporates `uasyncio` as frozen
bytecode. Daily builds do not. Freezing `uasyncio` increases the free RAM when
running the `c_app` demo from ~6KB to ~10KB.

To run the demo the file `local.py` should be edited for the server IP address.
The demo supports up to four clients. Each client's `local.py` should be edited
to give each client a unique client ID in range 1..4. Note that the ESP8266
must have a stored network connection to access the server.

On the server ensure that `local.py` is on the path and run `s_app_cp.py`.

###### [Contents](./README.md#1-contents)

# 4. Client side applications

Messages comprise a single line of text; if the line is not terminated with a
newline ('\n') the client library will append it. Newlines are only allowed as
the last character. Blank lines will be ignored.

A basic client-side application has this form:
```python
import uasyncio as asyncio
import ujson
import client


class App():
    def __init__(self, loop):
        self.cl = client.Client(loop)
        loop.create_task(self.start(loop))

    async def start(self, loop):
        await self.cl  # Wait until client has connected to server
        loop.create_task(self.reader())
        loop.create_task(self.writer())

    async def reader(self):
        while True:
            line = await self.cl.readline()  # Wait until data received
            data = ujson.loads(line)
            print('Got', data, 'from server app')

    async def writer(self):
        data = [0, 0]
        count = 0
        while True:
            data[0] = count
            count += 1
            print('Sent', data, 'to server app\n')
            await self.cl.write(ujson.dumps(data))
            await asyncio.sleep(5)
        
    def close(self):
        self.cl.close()

loop = asyncio.get_event_loop()
app = App(loop)
try:
    loop.run_forever()
finally:
    app.close()  # Ensure proper shutdown e.g. on ctrl-C
```
If an outage of server or WiFi occurs, the `write` and `readline` methods will
pause until connectivity has been restored. The server side API is similar.

## 4.1 The Client class

Constructor args:
 1. `loop` The event loop.
 2. `verbose=False` Provides optional debug output.
 3. `led=None` If a `Pin` instance is passed it will be toggled each time a
 keepalive message is received. Can provide a heartbeat LED if connectivity is
 present.

Methods (asynchrounous):
 1. `readline` No args. Pauses until data received. Returns a line.
 2. `write` Args: `buf`, `pause=True`. `buf` holds a line of text. If `pause`
 is set the method will pause after writing to ensure that the total elapsed
 time exceeds the timeout period. This minimises the risk of buffer overruns in
 the event that an outage occurs.

Methods (synchronous):
 1. `status` Returns `True` if connectivity is present.
 2. `close` Closes the socket. Should be called in the event of an exception
 such as a ctrl-c interrupt.

Bound variable:
 1. `connects` The number of times the `Client` instance has connected to WiFi.

The `Client` class is awaitable. If
```python
await client_instance
```
is isuued, the coroutine will pause until connectivity is (re)established.

###### [Contents](./README.md#1-contents)

# 5. Server side applications

Messages comprise a single line of text; if the line is not terminated with a
newline ('\n') the server library will append it. Newlines are only allowed as
the last character. Blank lines will be ignored.

A basic server-side application has this form:
```python
import asyncio
import json
import server_cp as server

class App():
    def __init__(self, loop, client_id):
        self.data = [0, 0, 0]  # Exchange a 3-list with remote
        loop.create_task(self.start(loop, client_id))

    async def start(self, loop, client_id):
        conn = await server.client_conn(client_id)  # Wait for the specific EP8266
        loop.create_task(self.reader(conn, client_id))
        loop.create_task(self.writer(conn, client_id))

    async def reader(self, conn, client_id):
        while True:
            line = await conn.readline()  # Pause in event of outage
            self.data = json.loads(line)
            print('Got', self.data, 'from remote', client_id)

    async def writer(self, conn, client_id):
        count = 0
        while True:
            self.data[0] = count
            count += 1
            print('Sent', self.data, 'to remote', client_id, '\n')
            await conn.write(json.dumps(self.data))  # Pause in event of outage
            await asyncio.sleep(5)
        

def run():
    loop = asyncio.get_event_loop()
    clients = [App(loop, n) for n in range(1, 5)]  # Accept 4 clients with ID's 1-4
    try:
        loop.run_until_complete(server.run(loop, 10, False))
    except KeyboardInterrupt:
        print('Interrupted')
    finally:
        server.Connection.close_all()

if __name__ == "__main__":
    run()
```

## 5.1 The server module

This is based on the `Connection` class. A `Connection` instance provides a
communication channel to a specific ESP8266 client. The `Connection` instance
for a given client is a singleton and is acquired by issuing
```python
conn = await server.client_conn(client_id)
```
This will pause until connectivity has been established. It can be issued at
any time: if the `Connection` has already been instantiated, that instance will
be returned. The `Connection` constructor should not be called by applications.

The `Connection` instance:

Methods (asynchrounous):
 1. `readline` No args. Pauses until data received. Returns a line.
 2. `write` Args: `buf`, `pause=True`. `buf` holds a line of text. If `pause`
 is set the method will pause after writing to ensure that the total elapsed
 time exceeds the timeout period. This minimises the risk of buffer overruns in
 the event that an outage occurs.

Method (synchronous):
 1. `status` Returns `True` if connectivity is present.

Class Method (synchronous):
 1. `close_all` No args. Closes all sockets: call on exception (e.g. ctrl-c).

The `Connection` class is awaitable. If
```python
await connection_instance
```
is isuued, the coroutine will pause until connectivity is (re)established.

###### [Contents](./README.md#1-contents)

# 6. Ensuring resilience

There are two principal ways of provoking `LmacRxBlk` errors and crashes.
 1. Failing to close sockets when connectivity is lost.
 2. Feeding excessive amounts of data to a socket after connectivity is lost:
 this causes an overflow to an internal ESP8266 buffer.

These modules aim to address these issues transparently to application code,
however it is possible to write applications which vioate 2.

There is a global `TIMEOUT` value defined in `local.py` which should be the
same for the server and all clients. Each end of the link sends a `keepalive`
(KA) packet (an empty line) at a rate guaranteed to ensure that at least one KA
will be received in every `TIMEOUT` period. If it is not, connectivity is
presumed lost and both ends of the interface adopt a recovery procedure.

By default the `write` methods implement a pause which ensures that only one
packet can be sent during the `TIMEOUT` interval. This aims to ensure that
condition 2. above is met. However if more than one message is sent in quick
succesion, only the first will have low latency.

Calling `write` with `pause=False` fixes this but requires that the application
limits the amount of data transmitted in the `TIMEOUT` period to avoid buffer
overflow.

###### [Contents](./README.md#1-contents)

# 7. Quality of service

In MQTT parlance the link operates at qos==0: there is no guarantee of packet
delivery. Normally when an outage occurs transmission is delayed until
connectivity resumes. Packet loss will occur if, at the time when a message is
sent, an outage has occurred but has not yet been detected by the sender.

## 7.1 Using an acknowledge packet

To achieve guaranteed delivery include an incrementing `message_id` in the data
and have the peer data packets include the ID as an acknowledgement. If the
acknowledgement is not received in a certain period, re-send the packet.

This provides qos==1. It does not provide qos==2: there is a remote chance that
the acknowledge packet is lost, in which case the original packet will
erroneously be retransmitted. One approach to handling this is to ignore
incoming duplicate messages (as identified by their `message_id`).

## 7.2 Another approach

I have not yet tested this but I think this will work
```python
    async def writer(self, conn):
        dstr = json.dumps(self.data)  # If an outage occurs now
        await conn.write(dstr)  # message may be lost
        await asyncio.sleep(local.TIMEOUT / 1000)  # time for outage detection
        if not conn.status():  # Meassage may have been lost
            await conn.write(dstr)
```
If the outage is detected before the initial write, the write will wait until
the outage is cleared and proceed succesfully. On completion `status` returns
`True` and no retransmission will occur.

Another fail case is where the outage occurs before the initial write, but it
has not yet been detected. The initial write puts data into a socket whose peer
is lost. By calling `status` after the period of the detection timeout the
outage is detected and retransmission occurs.

If the initial write succeeds an outage might occur during the `sleep` period.
In this case `status` returns `False` and the message would be repeated. This
could be handled by including an incrementing `message_id` in the data, with
the peer discarding duplicates.

###### [Contents](./README.md#1-contents)

# 8. Performance

## 8.1 Latency and throughput

The interface is intended to provide low latency: if a switch on one node
controls a pin on another, a quick response can be expected. The link is not
designed for high throughput because of the buffer overflow issue discussed in
[section 6](./README.md#6-ensuring-resilence). This is essentially a limitation
of the ESP8266 device.

**TIMEOUT**

This is defined in `local.py`. Its value should be common to all clients and
the sever. It determines the time taken to detect an outage and the frequency
of `keepalive` packets. In principle a reduced time will improve throughput
however I have not tested values <1.5s.

## 8.2 Client RAM utilisation

With a daily build and no use of frozen bytecode the demo reports just under
6KB free. With a release build this increases to nearly 10KB because
`uasyncio` is included as frozen bytecode. Free RAM of 21.5KB was achieved
with compiled firmware with `client.py`, `primitives.py` and `uasyncio` frozen
as bytecode.

Commit message:

README.md Add planned enhancements section.

README.md, after:

# 0. MicroPython IOT application design

IOT (Internet of Things) systems commonly comprise a set of endpoints on a WiFi
network. Internet access is provided by an access point (AP) linked to a
router. Endpoints run an internet protocol such as MQTT or HTTP and normally
run continously. They may be located in places which are hard to access:
reliability is therefore paramount. Security is also a factor for endpoints
exposed to the internet.

Under MicroPython the available hardware for endpoints is limited. At the time
of writing (December 2018) the Pyboard D is not yet available. The ESP32 is
incapable of 24/7 operation owing to [this issue](https://github.com/micropython/micropython-esp32/issues/167).
The ESP8266 remains as a readily available inexpensive device which, with care,
is capable of long term reliable operation. It does suffer from limited
resources, in particular RAM. Achieving resilient operation in the face of WiFi
or server outages is not straightforward: see
[this document](https://github.com/peterhinch/micropython-samples/tree/master/resilient).
The approach advocated here radically simplifies writing resilient ESP8266 IOT
applications.

The usual arrangement for MicroPython internet access is as below.
![Image](images/block_diagram_orig.png)

Running internet protocols on ESP8266 nodes has the following drawbacks:
 1. It can be difficult to ensure resilience in the face of outages of WiFi and
 of the remote endpoint.
 2. Running TLS on the ESP8266 is demanding in terms of resources: establishing
 a connection can take 30s.
 3. There are potential security issues for internet-facing nodes.
 4. The security issue creates a requirement periodically to install patches to
 firmware or to libraries. This raises the issue of physical access.
 5. Internet applications can be demanding of RAM.

This document proposes an alternative where the ESP8266 nodes communicate with
a local server. This runs CPython code and supports the internet protocol
required by the application. The server and the ESP8266 nodes communicate using
a simple protocol based on the exchange of lines of text. The server can run on
a Linux box such as a Raspberry Pi; this can run 24/7 at minimal running cost.

![Image](images/block_diagram.png)  

Benefits are:
 1. Security is handled on a device with an OS. Updates are easily accomplished.
 2. The text-based protocol minimises the attack surface presented by nodes.
 3. The protocol is resilient in the face of outages of WiFi and of the server:
 barring errors in the application design, crash-free 24/7 operation is a
 realistic prospect.
 4. The amount of code running on the ESP8266 is smaller than that required to
 run a resilient internet protocol such as [this MQTT version](https://github.com/peterhinch/micropython-mqtt.git).
 5. The server side application runs under CPython on a relatively powerful
 device having access to the full suite of Python libraries. Such a platform
 is ideally suited to running an internet protocol. Even minimal hardware has
 the horsepower easily to support TLS, and to maintain concurrent links to
 multiple client nodes. Use of threading is feasible.

The principal drawback is that in addition to application code on the ESP8266
node, application code is also required on the PC to provide the "glue" linking
the internet protocol with each of the client nodes. In many applications this
code may be minimal.

There are use-cases where conectivity is entirely local, for example logging
locally acquired data or using some nodes to control and monitor others. In
such cases no internet protocol is required and the server side application
merely passes data between nodes and/or logs data to disk.

# 1. Contents

 0. [MicroPython IOT application design](./README.md#0-microPython-iot-application-design)  
 1. [Contents](./README.md#1-contents)  
 2. [Design](./README.md#2-design)  
  2.1 [Protocol](./README.md#21-protocol)  
 3. [Files](./README.md#3-files)  
  3.1 [Installation](./README.md#31-installation)  
 4. [Client side applications](./README.md#4-client-side-applications)  
  4.1 [The Client class](./README.md#41-the-client-class)  
 5. [Server side applications](./README.md#5-server-side-applications)  
  5.1 [The server module](./README.md#51-the-server-module)  
 6. [Ensuring resilience](./README.md#6-ensuring-resilience) Guidelines for application design.   
 7. [Quality of service](./README.md#7-quality-of-service) Guaranteeing message delivery.  
  7.1 [Using an acknowledge packet](./README.md#71-using-an-acknowledge-packet)  
  7.2 [Another approach](./README.md#72-another-approach)  
 8. [Performance](./README.md#8-performance)  
  8.1 [Latency and throughput](./README.md#81-latency-and-throughput)  
  8.2 [Client RAM utilisation](./README.md#82-client-ram-utilisation)  
 9. [Planned enhancements](./READMEmd#9-planned-enhancements)  

# 2. Design

The code is asynchronous and based on `uasyncio` (`asyncio` on the server
side). Client applications on the ESP8266 import `client.py` which provides the
interface to the link. The server side application (written in CPython) uses
`server_cp.py`.

Messages are required to be complete lines of text. They typically comprise an
arbitrary Python object encoded using JSON and terminated with a newline.

There is no guarantee of delivery of a message. Techniques to overcome this are
described in [section 7](./README.md#7-quality-of-service). Performance
limitations are discussed in [section 8](./README.md#8-performance).

## 2.1 Protocol

Client and server applications use `readline` and `write` methods to
communicate: in the case of an outage of WiFi or the connected endpoint, the
method will pause until the outage ends.

The link status is determined by periodic exchanges of keepalive messages. This
is transparent to the application. If a keepalive is not received within a user
specified timeout an outage is declared. On the client the WiFi is disconnected
and a reconnection procedure is initiated. On the server the connection is
closed and it awaits a new connection.

Each client has a unique ID which is stored in `local.py`. This ID enables the
server application to determine which physical client is associated with an
incoming connection.

###### [Contents](./README.md#1-contents)

# 3. Files

For ESP8266 client:

 1. `client.py` Client module.
 2. `c_app.py` Demo client-side application.
 3. `primitives.py` Stripped down version of `asyn.py`.

For server (run under CPython 3.5+):
 1. `server_cp.py` Server module.
 2. `s_app_cp.py` Demo server-side application.

For both:
 1. `local.py` Example of local config file.

`local.py` should be edited to ensure each client has a unique ID. Other
constants must be common to all clients and the server:
 1. `PORT` Port for socket communication.
 2. `SERVER` IP address of local server PC.
 3. `TIMEOUT` In ms. Normally 1500. See sections 6 and 7.
 4. `CLIENT_ID` Associates an ESP8266 with its server-side application. Must be
 unique to each client. May be zny `\n` terminated Python string.

## 3.1 Installation

The ESP8266 modules can run without recourse to frozen bytecode however the
device has insufficient RAM to compile `client.py`: it should therefor be 
[cross compiled](https://github.com/micropython/micropython/tree/master/mpy-cross).

The release firmware build (currently 1.9.4) incorporates `uasyncio` as frozen
bytecode. Daily builds do not. Freezing `uasyncio` increases the free RAM when
running the `c_app` demo from ~6KB to ~10KB.

To run the demo the file `local.py` should be edited for the server IP address.
The demo supports up to four clients. Each client's `local.py` should be edited
to give each client a unique client ID in range 1..4. Note that the ESP8266
must have a stored network connection to access the server.

On the server ensure that `local.py` is on the path and run `s_app_cp.py`.

###### [Contents](./README.md#1-contents)

# 4. Client side applications

Messages comprise a single line of text; if the line is not terminated with a
newline ('\n') the client library will append it. Newlines are only allowed as
the last character. Blank lines will be ignored.

A basic client-side application has this form:
```python
import uasyncio as asyncio
import ujson
import client


class App():
    def __init__(self, loop):
        self.cl = client.Client(loop)
        loop.create_task(self.start(loop))

    async def start(self, loop):
        await self.cl  # Wait until client has connected to server
        loop.create_task(self.reader())
        loop.create_task(self.writer())

    async def reader(self):
        while True:
            line = await self.cl.readline()  # Wait until data received
            data = ujson.loads(line)
            print('Got', data, 'from server app')

    async def writer(self):
        data = [0, 0]
        count = 0
        while True:
            data[0] = count
            count += 1
            print('Sent', data, 'to server app\n')
            await self.cl.write(ujson.dumps(data))
            await asyncio.sleep(5)
        
    def close(self):
        self.cl.close()

loop = asyncio.get_event_loop()
app = App(loop)
try:
    loop.run_forever()
finally:
    app.close()  # Ensure proper shutdown e.g. on ctrl-C
```
If an outage of server or WiFi occurs, the `write` and `readline` methods will
pause until connectivity has been restored. The server side API is similar.

## 4.1 The Client class

Constructor args:
 1. `loop` The event loop.
 2. `verbose=False` Provides optional debug output.
 3. `led=None` If a `Pin` instance is passed it will be toggled each time a
 keepalive message is received. Can provide a heartbeat LED if connectivity is
 present.

Methods (asynchrounous):
 1. `readline` No args. Pauses until data received. Returns a line.
 2. `write` Args: `buf`, `pause=True`. `buf` holds a line of text. If `pause`
 is set the method will pause after writing to ensure that the total elapsed
 time exceeds the timeout period. This minimises the risk of buffer overruns in
 the event that an outage occurs.

Methods (synchronous):
 1. `status` Returns `True` if connectivity is present.
 2. `close` Closes the socket. Should be called in the event of an exception
 such as a ctrl-c interrupt.

Bound variable:
 1. `connects` The number of times the `Client` instance has connected to WiFi.

The `Client` class is awaitable. If
```python
await client_instance
```
is isuued, the coroutine will pause until connectivity is (re)established.

###### [Contents](./README.md#1-contents)

# 5. Server side applications

Messages comprise a single line of text; if the line is not terminated with a
newline ('\n') the server library will append it. Newlines are only allowed as
the last character. Blank lines will be ignored.

A basic server-side application has this form:
```python
import asyncio
import json
import server_cp as server

class App():
    def __init__(self, loop, client_id):
        self.data = [0, 0, 0]  # Exchange a 3-list with remote
        loop.create_task(self.start(loop, client_id))

    async def start(self, loop, client_id):
        conn = await server.client_conn(client_id)  # Wait for the specific EP8266
        loop.create_task(self.reader(conn, client_id))
        loop.create_task(self.writer(conn, client_id))

    async def reader(self, conn, client_id):
        while True:
            line = await conn.readline()  # Pause in event of outage
            self.data = json.loads(line)
            print('Got', self.data, 'from remote', client_id)

    async def writer(self, conn, client_id):
        count = 0
        while True:
            self.data[0] = count
            count += 1
            print('Sent', self.data, 'to remote', client_id, '\n')
            await conn.write(json.dumps(self.data))  # Pause in event of outage
            await asyncio.sleep(5)
        

def run():
    loop = asyncio.get_event_loop()
    clients = [App(loop, n) for n in range(1, 5)]  # Accept 4 clients with ID's 1-4
    try:
        loop.run_until_complete(server.run(loop, 10, False))
    except KeyboardInterrupt:
        print('Interrupted')
    finally:
        server.Connection.close_all()

if __name__ == "__main__":
    run()
```

## 5.1 The server module

This is based on the `Connection` class. A `Connection` instance provides a
communication channel to a specific ESP8266 client. The `Connection` instance
for a given client is a singleton and is acquired by issuing
```python
conn = await server.client_conn(client_id)
```
This will pause until connectivity has been established. It can be issued at
any time: if the `Connection` has already been instantiated, that instance will
be returned. The `Connection` constructor should not be called by applications.

The `Connection` instance:

Methods (asynchrounous):
 1. `readline` No args. Pauses until data received. Returns a line.
 2. `write` Args: `buf`, `pause=True`. `buf` holds a line of text. If `pause`
 is set the method will pause after writing to ensure that the total elapsed
 time exceeds the timeout period. This minimises the risk of buffer overruns in
 the event that an outage occurs.

Method (synchronous):
 1. `status` Returns `True` if connectivity is present.

Class Method (synchronous):
 1. `close_all` No args. Closes all sockets: call on exception (e.g. ctrl-c).

The `Connection` class is awaitable. If
```python
await connection_instance
```
is isuued, the coroutine will pause until connectivity is (re)established.

###### [Contents](./README.md#1-contents)

# 6. Ensuring resilience

There are two principal ways of provoking `LmacRxBlk` errors and crashes.
 1. Failing to close sockets when connectivity is lost.
 2. Feeding excessive amounts of data to a socket after connectivity is lost:
 this causes an overflow to an internal ESP8266 buffer.

These modules aim to address these issues transparently to application code,
however it is possible to write applications which vioate 2.

There is a global `TIMEOUT` value defined in `local.py` which should be the
same for the server and all clients. Each end of the link sends a `keepalive`
(KA) packet (an empty line) at a rate guaranteed to ensure that at least one KA
will be received in every `TIMEOUT` period. If it is not, connectivity is
presumed lost and both ends of the interface adopt a recovery procedure.

By default the `write` methods implement a pause which ensures that only one
packet can be sent during the `TIMEOUT` interval. This aims to ensure that
condition 2. above is met. However if more than one message is sent in quick
succesion, only the first will have low latency.

Calling `write` with `pause=False` fixes this but requires that the application
limits the amount of data transmitted in the `TIMEOUT` period to avoid buffer
overflow.

###### [Contents](./README.md#1-contents)

# 7. Quality of service

In MQTT parlance the link operates at qos==0: there is no guarantee of packet
delivery. Normally when an outage occurs transmission is delayed until
connectivity resumes. Packet loss will occur if, at the time when a message is
sent, an outage has occurred but has not yet been detected by the sender.

## 7.1 Using an acknowledge packet

To achieve guaranteed delivery include an incrementing `message_id` in the data
and have the peer data packets include the ID as an acknowledgement. If the
acknowledgement is not received in a certain period, re-send the packet.

This provides qos==1. It does not provide qos==2: there is a remote chance that
the acknowledge packet is lost, in which case the original packet will
erroneously be retransmitted. One approach to handling this is to ignore
incoming duplicate messages (as identified by their `message_id`).

## 7.2 Another approach

I have not yet tested this but I think this will work
```python
    async def writer(self, conn):
        dstr = json.dumps(self.data)  # If an outage occurs now
        await conn.write(dstr)  # message may be lost
        await asyncio.sleep(local.TIMEOUT / 1000)  # time for outage detection
        if not conn.status():  # Meassage may have been lost
            await conn.write(dstr)
```
If the outage is detected before the initial write, the write will wait until
the outage is cleared and proceed succesfully. On completion `status` returns
`True` and no retransmission will occur.

Another fail case is where the outage occurs before the initial write, but it
has not yet been detected. The initial write puts data into a socket whose peer
is lost. By calling `status` after the period of the detection timeout the
outage is detected and retransmission occurs.

If the initial write succeeds an outage might occur during the `sleep` period.
In this case `status` returns `False` and the message would be repeated. This
could be handled by including an incrementing `message_id` in the data, with
the peer discarding duplicates.

###### [Contents](./README.md#1-contents)

# 8. Performance

## 8.1 Latency and throughput

The interface is intended to provide low latency: if a switch on one node
controls a pin on another, a quick response can be expected. The link is not
designed for high throughput because of the buffer overflow issue discussed in
[section 6](./README.md#6-ensuring-resilence). This is essentially a limitation
of the ESP8266 device.

**TIMEOUT**

This is defined in `local.py`. Its value should be common to all clients and
the sever. It determines the time taken to detect an outage and the frequency
of `keepalive` packets. In principle a reduced time will improve throughput
however I have not tested values <1.5s.

## 8.2 Client RAM utilisation

With a daily build and no use of frozen bytecode the demo reports just under
6KB free. With a release build this increases to nearly 10KB because
`uasyncio` is included as frozen bytecode. Free RAM of 21.5KB was achieved
with compiled firmware with `client.py`, `primitives.py` and `uasyncio` frozen
as bytecode.

###### [Contents](./README.md#1-contents)

# 9. Planned enhancements

 1. Produce demo code for qos == 2.
 2. Produce a demo of one client controlling another.
 3. Extend the protocol to the Pyboard. In this instance the client side
 application runs on the Pyboard. The [existing I2C module](https://github.com/peterhinch/micropython-async/tree/master/i2c)
 provides a text based serial interface between the Pyboard and the ESP8266,
 which merely acts as a relay passing the data to the server-side application
 via the resilient link. The code running on the ESP8266 will be fixed and
 probably also supplied as a firmware binary.
